# Abstract

Medical decisions are often made within high-pressure situations, with their outcomes having a major impact on patients. There has been limited work aiming to understand the cognitive mechanisms of medical diagnoses, and the potential drivers of both diagnostic error and overconfidence. This thesis explores the role of confidence during diagnoses, and its contribution to both the information that clinicians seek and the hypotheses that clinicians consider during the diagnostic decision process. The research presented in this thesis adopts several methodologies that increase in naturalism with each successive study, including interactive patient vignettes, a think-aloud protocol, virtual reality and ethnography based on observations within real medical settings. Our first line of research investigates the interplay between information seeking and both confidence and accuracy during medical diagnoses. To this end, we found that confidence was associated with the amount of information sought, but accuracy was associated with an efficiency in information seeking, which meant seeking the right information for each patient. Our second line of research involved detecting different reasoning strategies that medical students use during diagnoses. We found that medical students used a range of reasoning strategies that could not simply be explained by their individually preferred decision making style, the type of patient case being diagnosed or even the students' educational background. The third key avenue of research involved investigating whether medical students use an approach of broadening or narrowing their diagnostic hypotheses as they receive information. We find evidence of an initial broadening of diagnoses, which can then become a narrowing of diagnoses as medical students seek hypothesis-driven tests and observe a patient's reaction to treatment (also increasing their diagnostic confidence). Collectively, this thesis shows how important confidence is as a marker during medical diagnoses, as it signals to other clinicians both the information known about a patient and how much a clinician's thinking has evolved with respect to the diagnoses being considered for the patient. This thesis has implications for medical education on how diagnostic reasoning is taught and whether there can be several 'good' approaches to making diagnoses. This thesis also has implications for cognitive psychology, both methodologically (for the richness of data from think-aloud and simulation-based tasks) and theoretically (for how information seeking may reflect differences in reasoning strategies and the consideration of multiple hypotheses at a time).

# Chapter Summary

In this chapter, we presented an overview of past work studying medical diagnoses. In particular, we underscored the need to study their cognitive mechanisms due to the larger incidence of diagnostic errors and their impact on patient care. We laid out research that sought to draw a causal link between cognitive biases and diagnostic errors, with a particular focus on overconfidence/underconfidence. We outlined the importance of confidence from a cognitive psychology perspective, particularly in the field of medicine where objective feedback that could correct biases in confidence is scarce. Finally, we explored the link between information seeking and confidence, which has been investigated in cognitive psychology but only to a limited degree in the context of medical diagnoses. To this end, we orient our current work on further elucidating this link in diagnostic decisions. The overarching hypothesis of our work is that miscalibrations of confidence (when compared to objective accuracy) are caused by clinicians' suboptimal information seeking. For instance, a clinician may cease seeking information and decide on a diagnosis too early (known as 'premature closure'). Alternatively, a clinician may preferentially seek more information to confirm their beliefs, inflating their subjective confidence. We also aim to understand how information seeking relates to the breadth of diagnoses being considered by clinicians. By developing our understanding of how information seeking relates to diagnostic uncertainty, we can present implications for future work on how to prompt appropriate information seeking, and in turn appropriate diagnostic confidence.

We now present the structure for the subsequent chapters in this thesis. Materials for the empirical studies, including data, are available on OSF: https://osf.io/kb54u/.

In Chapter 2, we present a systematic scoping review of the medical and psychological literature in which confidence or certainty has been studied within diagnostic decisions. Whilst some of the extant literature has been presented here, we use this review to describe the existing literature more thoroughly. This is especially pertinent given the broad relevance of diagnostic confidence across medicine alongside the siloed nature of literature within the various medical specialties, necessitating a more systematic approach to capturing the relevant literature. The main aim of this review is to look at whether past work has found evidence for calibration of confidence judgements provided during diagnostic decisions. We also look at how confidence predicts aspects of the patients' care pathway. Alongside these research aims, the review is used to map out the themes of the extant literature and types of methodologies used. We use the reviewed literature to propose a conceptual model for how diagnostic decisions are affected by decisional, clinician-based and contextual factors.

In Chapter 3, we present an online behavioural study where participants (medical students) freely sought information and provided diagnostic differentials at different stages during a series of patient vignettes. This study allows us to look at how diagnostic differentials and confidence are affected by patterns of information seeking. In particular, we introduce and investigate different aspects of information seeking, namely how much, how valuable and how variable the information that medical students seek is, with these aspects differentially informing diagnostic confidence and accuracy.

In Chapter 4, we present an in-person study using a similar vignette-based paradigm where medical students verbalised their thought process as they were making these diagnoses, with the aim to use these think-aloud utterances to classify different diagnostic reasoning strategies. We use this paradigm to investigate how reasoning strategies affect confidence and information seeking. This study also allows for a qualitative analysis of medical students' thought process whilst they are making diagnoses, including their main considerations regarding the evaluation of diagnostic hypotheses.

In Chapter 5, we present the third empirical study, where we investigate diagnostic decisions in a more naturalistic manner by using virtual reality paediatric scenarios to investigate differences in information seeking and confidence. This paradigm allows for the study of information seeking in an open-ended manner that is more akin to real medical practice. Given the higher fidelity of this paradigm, we also study how the ongoing treatment of patients is informed by confidence and information seeking.

In Chapter 6, we present a reflective chapter based on observations in both Adult Intensive Care and Emergency Medicine, whereby the findings from this DPhil are contextualised within the decisions made during actual medical practice. This chapter is used to better characterise the strengths and limitations of the studies within this DPhil by evaluating how well they relate to aspects of everyday medical decision making, as well as discussing real examples of where diagnostic uncertainty arises. This section acts as a precursor to our General Discussion section, such that evaluations of this DPhil's ecological validity and generalisability can be grounded in everyday medical practice.

In Chapter 7, we present an overall discussion of the studies conducted in the context of the current literature on diagnostic decision making. We aim to demonstrate how the cognitive mechanisms of confidence and information seeking impact medical diagnoses. We discuss the implications of this work for both the field of cognitive psychology and medicine (in particular, how our findings can inform future medical education given our focus on medical students). We finally evaluate the generalisability of our work and suggest directions for future research (within both cognitive psychology and medical decision making) and medical practice.
